[startPage=30]
First thing the next morning Ida ran over to check the fish trap. Shreds of fog hung in the trees around camp and on the other side of the water. Ida felt as though she and Grandma were the only two people in the world.

She got down on her hands and knees on the creek bank and peered into the tumbling stream in front of the trap. Five shadowy forms were lodged between the sticks. It had worked! The trap had worked. She raced back to tell Little Grandma.

"There are five fish, Grandma. Five!"

Little Grandma smiled. "After breakfast, we tend to them." She took up a flour-sack drying towel and went to bathe in the icy waters of the Sound as she did every day, all year around. Ida hurried into the woods to pee, squatting among the dried weeds that tickled her legs and bottom.

What if someone came through the woods right

[endPage=30][startPage=31]
now? she thought. Someone from a farm on the other side of the island? She jumped up and ran back to Little Grandma on the beach.

Little Grandma was already halfway into the water, undressing as she went. "My sister and I bathed always at fishing camp," she said, looking back at Ida with a twinkle in her eye.

"You did?" said Ida. She herself was used to bathing in a tub of hot water in the front room at home. She already knew how cold the Sound was. Even on the hottest days of summer, the children of Suqua did not linger in the water.

She made herself wade in up to her knees, scrunching up her face with the shock of the cold. Seeing Grandma already calmly sunk down to her shoulders, she pulled off her dress, threw it on the beach and quickly sat down.

In a flash she was back on her feet and running for the beach. Little Grandma chuckled and called her a wet hen. With her dress held against her, Ida hurried to the shelter to find something to dry off with.

That was one of the things that Ida liked best about Little Grandma. Even though she never made a fuss

[endPage=31][startPage=32]
about things herself, she did not mind if Ida did. Mother, on the other hand, did not make a fuss and expected Ida not to make one, either.

The dip in the Sound made Ida feel as though she had mastered fishing camp. After a breakfast of apples and warmed-over potatoes, she confidently helped Grandma build a drying rack out of sticks to hang the fish meat on.

When it was ready, she and Grandma went to the stream and knelt on the bank. Grandma carefully pulled a slippery salmon from the trap, and Ida knocked it on the head with a piece of wood. As Grandma cleaned each of the first three fish, Ida hung the trimmed meat on the rack to dry in the sun.

Ida cleaned the last two fish herself. She took her time, digging her toes into the cool sand as she worked and glancing up each time a bird called. She liked this time of year with its leftover warmth of summer and its whisper of the mystery of winter to come.

She thought of her classmates as she tried to cut away the fin without taking too much fish. Wouldn't that boasting Leroy Halley be jealous when he heard she had been to fishing camp with Grandma! She was very glad

[endPage=32][startPage=33]
to be away from the sound of his bossy voice.

Not that she didn't feel a little sorry for Leroy right now. Katie Goldsmith's mother had accused him of stealing Katie's baseball—the one her big brother who played on a mill team had sent her. Katie's mother was taking Leroy to Indian Court over it.

It was true Leroy had been the last batter to hit the ball on Monday before it disappeared. But Ida did not think he had taken it. She was very glad *she* was not being taken to court.

That afternoon Grandma had Ida cover the drying fish with a cedar bough to keep the seagulls from stealing it. Then she and Ida pushed the canoe into the water and paddled across the inlet to a marsh where cattails grew.

They pulled up cattail roots to roast like potatoes for supper. Grandma cut cattail stalks whose long leaves she would use for her winter basketwork and new matting. Ida arranged the roots and stalks in the canoe. As they worked, the wind began to stir, causing the canoe to rock gently in the water.

Ida thought of the canoe maker and his noise. She turned her face in the direction of Suqua and listened

[endPage=33][startPage=34]
carefully. A new school and a new house for Teacher were being built up the hill behind the church. Every day for the past three weeks the sound of hammer blows had fallen on Suqua like hailstones.

Now she heard only the rustling of the cattail stalks. She thought of Leroy's taunting words, "You'll have to move as soon as the new school is finished. Everyone on the beach has to move, even the church."

Leroy's family did not live on the beach. They lived on land assigned to them further back on the reservation and would not have to move. "You don't know anything," she had said to him. He had given her a superior look and walked away.

Ida did not need Leroy to remind her that the Tribe's elders had agreed in the spring to turn the beach over to the U.S. War Department so a fort could be built there.

Families living on the beach would have to go to their separate land allotments scattered across the north and south reservations. No one but Teacher, who was getting a new house, welcomed the move.

Six months had passed now since the agreement had been made, and still no one had come to build the fort. Summer was over. Some of the Tribe had begun to

[endPage=34][startPage=35]
believe they would not have to move, after all. Yet Teacher's preparations for leaving the old school were worrisome.

"Grandma," Ida said, swishing her hand in the water, "David Jennings says the War Department has probably changed its mind about building the fort, and if we're quiet about it, we can keep living on the beach."

Grandma placed another handful of stalks in the canoe. "We accepted the money to move," she said with finality.

A feeling of dread crept over Ida like the edge of a shadow. Little Grandma did not always tell her what she wanted to hear, but she could be counted on to tell things as they were. Moving to the family's allotment on the north reservation would put Ida forty-five minutes by water away from the new school and who-knew-how far from Katie, David Jennings, and Tony. However would she manage so far away?

Little Grandma gazed at her sympathetically. After a while she raised her head to the wind and said, "We sail back to camp."

Ready to abandon her worries, Ida sprang into action. If there was one thing she liked to do with Grandma more

[endPage=35][startPage=36]
than anything else, it was to sail. While Grandma finished cutting stalks, Ida fit the sail pole into a block of wood in the canoe bottom. To keep it upright, she tied it against one of the canoe's crosspieces.

She laughed as she unwound the sail and watched it fill with wind. Made of stitched-together flour sacks, it said in all directions in faded letters, "Fisher Blend Flour." Ida's underwear said the same thing.

Little Grandma smiled. She was the only one who knew Ida's joke about the canoe hanging its underwear out to dry.

The canoe began to move forward as Grandma worked the sail with a piece of rope tied to one corner. Gaining speed, it skimmed over the water with so little effort Ida thought she and Little Grandma might just sail right up over fishing camp and into the sky. Into the sky where hammers and War Departments could not follow.

On their third afternoon at camp, Ida and Grandma harvested the last of the salmon and pulled up the trap. While they were cleaning the fish, two white men landed near the stream. Grandma went on with her work.

[endPage=36][startPage=37]
Ida stopped. What if these men took away their fish? What if they drove Grandma and her off? She and Grandma were not on the reservation. Since white men could not fish at Port Madison Reservation, maybe she and Grandma could not fish here.

"Do not be frightened," Grandma murmured. "The Treaty says we may fish where our People have always fished."

The men examined the stream and kicked away the sticks lying on the bank. Ida was very glad she and Grandma had already taken up the trap. The men returned to their rowboat and passed in front of the camp, paddling close to shore and staring all the while at Ida and Grandma.

Ida wondered if they were from the War Department.

After supper, Grandma sat by the fire and gazed across the inlet as though she were no longer with Ida at all. After a bit, Ida drew closer to the fire and tried not to think about Mother and Father. Finally she said to Grandma, "Maybe we can come to fishing camp again next year."

"Maybe," said Grandma.

"Maybe we can bring Mother and Father."

[endPage=37][startPage=38]
Little Grandma nodded.

Ida poked at the fire with a long stick. "Is this a good fishing camp, Grandma?"

Little Grandma looked at her fondly. "It is a good camp."

"But it's not like *your* fishing camps, is it?"

"No," admitted Little Grandma.

"Why isn't it?" persisted Ida.

Grandma set a piece of wood on the fire and settled back beside her. "There were more people then, more fish. Except for the last camp, the camp of my fifteenth summer. That one was not the same."

Ida rested her chin on her knees and waited patiently.

"Many people did not go to that last camp. Seattle, our much-esteemed leader, had just died. People were discouraged. Ten years we had lived on the reservation. They were not good years. We were often hungry, sick. Now, our leader was gone.

"I was glad to leave Old Man House—the big house on the beach where each family had its rooms. In my grandfather's time, great leaders from many tribes lived in the house. But no longer. Now good people and bad people, some from other tribes, took shelter there. The

[endPage=38][startPage=39]
roof was falling down. I was glad to go to fishing camp."

As quietly as she could, Ida stretched out her legs and leaned back in the sand. Little Grandma glanced at her.

"But there were no stories at camp that year. There were not enough of us for games and laughing after supper. My father was silent."

Grandma herself fell silent for a while. At last she went on. "One evening, when night was lowering itself over camp, a Twana from the Skokomish Reservation drew up his canoe on the beach by our cooking fire." She motioned towards the beach and the fire as though she could picture them now.

"It had been a good day. The racks behind us were filled with drying fish. Father knew of the Twana. He offered him food. The Twana watched my sister and me as he ate. He had come for a wife."

Ida's skin prickled.

"He and Father spoke. As the moon rose, I was exchanged for three blankets. In the morning I went away with the Twana."

Ida shivered. "Weren't you scared to go with him, Grandma?"

Grandma seemed surprised by Ida's voice. After a

[endPage=39][startPage=40]
moment she said, "My father would not give me to a man who would mistreat me."

"But what about your family, your people?" said Ida. "Weren't you sad to leave them?" She imagined Little Grandma saying goodbye to her sister and her parents.

Grandma raised her chin bravely. "My family, my home," she said, "I took them with me wherever I went."

Ida waited respectfully for Grandma to go on, but Grandma had said all she was going to say. She separated the coals in the fire with a stick. Then, putting a hand on Ida's shoulder to help herself up, she went into the shelter to bed.

Ida rose and looked across the water where the light from a kerosene lamp lit the window of a lone farmhouse among the trees. She thought about how lonely Grandma must have been among strangers.

Maybe that was why she had come back to her own people. Neither Grandma nor Mother ever said how she came back, but Ida was very glad that she *had*. Otherwise, she might not have been her grandmother.

Ida went into the shelter and snuggled between the quilts with Little Grandma.
[endPage=40]
