[startPage=20]
Grandma paddled evenly and surely as though leaving shore with Ida hidden in the bottom of the canoe were a regular part of her morning chores. Ida poked her head out from under the mat. Little Grandma smiled at her calmly, her face wrinkled as an old leather boot.

Little Grandma was the dearest thing to Ida on land or on water. She was Ida's only grandmother, and Ida was her only grandchild. Grandma had had three other children before Mother, but none of them had lived past babyhood.

Ida loved Mother and Father in a different way from Little Grandma. They were like her arms and legs. She could not imagine life without them. But Little Grandma understood Ida when others did not. She comforted her when Mother was too busy and Father far away.

[endPage=20][startPage=21]
It had been Little Grandma's idea to set up a fishing camp. Father had said last time he was home that with the coming changes even more of the old ways would be lost. "Both you and I went to fishing camp with our families," he told Grandma. "But my wife has never gone, and neither has my daughter. We will soon forget how to feed ourselves."

Little Grandma was not one to answer quickly, nor to speak long. She said simply, "I will take Daybreak to fishing camp."

Ida was so pleased she had grinned for days. Mother made sure she understood that this was the only time she would be allowed to miss school. Also, it would not be the kind of fishing camp where families gathered for several weeks. There would be only Ida and Grandma, and they would stay two or three days.

That was fine with Ida. Except for the time the whole family had gone to visit Cousin Magda in the South Sound, she had never been away from home before. Only if everyone came along could she imagine wanting to go anywhere for long. It would be enough for Little Grandma and her to be on their own for two or three days.

[endPage=21][startPage=22]
From Ida's hiding place in the canoe she saw her friend Katie Goldsmith's house on the edge of the reservation. She wished Katie were outside so she could wave to her.

Suqua and Teacher were far enough behind now that she could safely come out from under the mat. She rolled it up and brought out a paddle. While Grandma dipped on the right side of the canoe, Ida dipped on the left, pulling the paddle through the water like a spoon through a bowlful of chowder.

Little Grandma steered a course to the south along the shoreline of the wooded island that lay across from Suqua like a footprint in the Sound. In the underbrush of the island's always-green cedars and firs, the vine maple was turning scarlet and the berry bushes gold as though to warn of changing times.

Grandma pointed out a farm carved out of the woods high on a bluff. Father always said Grandma was the farmer in the family. She had learned about growing things when she lived among the Twana on the Skokomish River.

Ida gazed up at the two-story white farmhouse with its huge barn and mown meadow. She wondered how

[endPage=22][startPage=23]
long it had taken to build the house and how long to cut down the trees and pull out all the stumps to make the meadow. She wondered if there were strong boys in the family to help and whether the father lived at home.

"When you are old like me, Daybreak," said Little Grandma, "maybe you will still paddle this canoe."

"Yes, Grandma," said Ida. She could not imagine herself ever being as old as Little Grandma, but she would like to have this canoe when she was.

Grandma's father had made it from a cedar tree for Grandma and her sister when they were girls. They used it to gather food and material for making baskets and mats. Now Mother used the canoe to get to her laundry work, and Ida and Grandma used it for fishing.

Ida loved being out on the water with Grandma. Overhead, the sky grew bluer with morning. A breeze began to stir at their backs, rippling the water so that it sparkled with light. She knew there were coho salmon under the surface, journeying from the sea back to the streams where they had hatched. She felt as though she were following them.

A while later Grandma steered the canoe into a tiny bay she had visited with other Suquamish in years past.

[endPage=23][startPage=24]
A swiftly flowing stream splashed out of the woods and down the bank. There were no signs of farm life nearby.

Ida stepped into the icy water and pushed the canoe up onto the beach. It felt good to stretch her legs. She and Grandma rested against a driftwood log and ate apple-butter sandwiches from home while their wet feet dried in the sun.

"Now we find branches for our house," said Grandma. She and Ida went into the woods and searched in the underbrush for branches that had broken off from the trees in windstorms.

In a sunny clearing Ida paused to pick the last of some late-blooming blackberries. For her efforts she got four overripe berries and scratches on her arms from the thorns. Grandma gathered several sturdy branches. Ida found mainly small ones.

"Little ones are for the fish," said Grandma.

Back on the beach, Grandma chose a flat spot above the tideline for a camp. Taking up a hatchet, she trimmed several of the branches into poles and sticks. Then she handed Ida a rock. "Now pound the poles into the ground," she said. "One pole for each corner of the house—a small house. And one in between the corners."

[endPage=24][startPage=25]
Ida happily did as she was told. When she was done, Grandma helped her tie crosspieces along the tops of the poles with lengths of rope. Then they unrolled the cattail mats Grandma had woven years before and tied those onto the pole frame to make walls. Another mat went across the top for a roof.

Ida stepped back. Before them stood a comfortable little shelter. "Just like Tony's house," she said proudly. "Except ours is better. We could live here all winter, Grandma."

"Too cold," said Little Grandma. She picked up several of the smaller branches and headed towards the stream. "You make the bed now," she said to Ida.

Ida pulled the remaining cedar boughs inside the shelter for a mattress. She thought about Tony as she worked. Sometimes he was like a brother, sometimes like a friend, and sometimes like an uncle. When she grew up, she thought she might marry him. First, though, he would have to stop drinking.

She hauled the quilts inside and spread them over the boughs. Then she joined Grandma at the stream. Grandma had already begun to build a fence of sticks spaced close together across the water. "A fish trap,"

[endPage=25][startPage=26]
she said. "The fish tries to swim through the sticks, but is too big and gets stuck. He cannot go backwards or forwards."

Ida pounded the rest of the sticks in while Grandma tied them together at the top. "A coho by supper; by morning, more," said Grandma.

Later, Ida gathered small sticks and driftwood for a fire while Grandma searched for large, smooth cooking stones. Grandma lit the fire and rolled the stones into it to heat. Ida tended the fire while Little Grandma returned to the stream bank to watch for their supper.

It was not long before Grandma plunged her hands into the water and came up with a wriggling salmon. She thumped it on a rock to kill it and, slitting it open, tossed its innards to a seagull on the beach.

She cut off the head, the tail, and the fins. Then she threaded the trimmed meat on a branched stick for Ida to pound into the ground near the fire to roast.

Next, Grandma took a pair of sticks and lifted some of the hot stones into a half-filled water basket. Right away the water began to boil. Little Grandma tossed in some potatoes from her garden. From time to time she added another hot stone.

[endPage=26][startPage=27]
Ida thought she had never been so hungry before and that roasting salmon had never smelled so good. Soon she and Little Grandma were enjoying the tender pink fish and crumbly white potatoes.

Ida continued to eat long after Little Grandma had finished. Everything tasted so good—twice as good as at home.

"It is many years since my last fishing camp," said Little Grandma. She rubbed her hands in the sand to clean them and leaned back against a log. "The fish are the same, but I am not!"

"People should still go to fishing camp," said Ida, licking her fingers. "They would like it."

"Some people do go," said Little Grandma. "But there are not as many fish now. The canneries take them."

"Maybe some people don't want to leave their work, either," said Ida. "Like Mother."

"Your mother works too hard."

"She needs to save money for a store," said Ida. "If Cousin Magda's house hadn't burned down, she would already have enough."

"A house is more important than a store," agreed Little Grandma.

[endPage=27][startPage=28]
Ida remembered how Mother had gone down to make arrangements with Teacher to send money to Uncle and his family as soon as she had heard the news. She had not even waited till Father's next visit home. Father had been proud of her when he returned.

"She does have enough for the cash register, though," Ida said now. "She told me." Mother had been planning to make a store in Suqua since Ida was seven. Sometimes they looked in the Sears-Roebuck catalog together to see what kinds of things Mother might want to stock.

Ida planned to be the person who rang up the purchases. She had watched how the clerk did it in the general store over on Dogfish Bay. Often in her mind she pressed the keys on the cash register and watched the numbers pop up in the little window on top. Then she turned the crank along the side, and the money drawer popped open—ping!

Most of all, though, she liked to imagine working alongside Mother. "Do you think Mother misses us?" she asked Grandma.

Grandma nodded her head. Ida moved closer and said, "I miss Mother."

Grandma put an arm around her, and they huddled

[endPage=28][startPage=29]
before the fire. After a long silence, Grandma said, "Once there was a canoe maker. He liked to work so much he hammered, he chipped, he pounded all day, all night."

"Like Mother," said Ida.

"Like your mother," said Grandma. "The leader of the sky people up above was angered. Too much noise. Much too much noise. He reached down through a hole in the sky, and he snatched up that canoe maker!" Grandma snatched at a twist of smoke from the fire, startling Ida into giggles.

When she had quieted, Grandma went on. "The people of the village wanted their canoe maker back. They shot arrows into the sky. See there?" Grandma pointed out a chain of stars overhead. "The people ran up those arrows into the sky and brought the canoe maker home."

"What did the leader of the sky people do about that?" asked Ida.

"He has done nothing," said Little Grandma. "The canoe maker is wiser now. He does not make so much noise. He goes to bed at dark. He does not start work till dawn." She gave Ida a squeeze and hoisted herself to her feet. "We do the same."
[endPage=29]
