[startPage=55]
Chapter 6
Back to School

It was suppertime and Father was still with the family. Usually, he would have been on his way back to logging camp by now. His extended visit confirmed the urgency of the situation at home.

"Three or four weeks I could expect the foreman to hold my job open for me," he said to Mother. "Eight years of working together counts for something. We could at least get a shelter up."

Ida had barely absorbed the idea that father might be home for a month when Nellie Goldsmith burst through the doorway. Panting from her climb up the slope, she shook her fist at Father and yelled, "If it weren't for you, everyone wouldn't be so stirred up and talking about moving!"

Mother invited her to sit down for coffee, but Nellie would have none of that!

"I am not moving. Not moving. They can build the fort
[endPage=55]

[startPage=56]
over me!" She thumped the table with her hand. "If it weren't for you and the others telling them they could have the beach—"

Father got up and walked out of the house. When Nellie realized he was not returning, she left in pursuit.

"But Father was at logging camp when they gave up the beach," said Ida. "It's not his fault."

"Of course not," said Mother. "Nellie just doesn't know how she's going to feed all those children on her allotment back in the woods."

"Teacher says we're expected to plant big gardens and sow crops for livestock."

"I expect Teacher has a good way to make forest into farmland, and fishermen and loggers into farmers, then."

"I don't think so," said Ida. None of the families she knew who already lived on their allotments had been able to clear more than an acre or two of land.

It wasn't so difficult to cut down the trees, Father said. The hard part was getting the stumps out. Most people, once they got a house up, went back to fishing or working at the mills or at the logging camps.

When Father came back in, he and Mother sat down at the table and studied the drawings and added up
[endPage=56]

[startPage=57]
figures. "If it's to be a frame house with finished lumber, we'll have to sell trees from the allotment to pay for it," he said after a while. "To sell the trees I'd have to ask permission of Mr. Simpson."

Mother waited for him to go on. Ida carefully shifted position where she sat on the bed. As long as she didn't draw attention to herself, she might be allowed to stay up and listen.

Little Grandma rocked quietly by the stove.

"I don't like having to ask permission," Father said. "It's as though we were children."

Mother looked at the sketches again.

"There's also the problem of getting the trees to water to float them to the mill and then getting finished lumber up to the allotment," said Father. "It all takes time, and there's still the building to do."

Mother nodded.

"If it were a log house, we could use our own trees. I would cut them without asking Mr. Simpson. After all, I would not be selling them." Father looked up for Mother's opinion, adding, "Later I will finish off the inside for you."

Mother sighed a little. "Later," she agreed. Everyone
[endPage=57]

[startPage=58]
knew later might be a very long time away.

Nonetheless, Father appeared relieved. "I'll get Tony to go over with me tomorrow," he said. "We'll start cutting trees right away."

"Tony's not here," said Ida.

"No?" said Father. "Didn't I see him on the beach this afternoon?"

Ida shook her head. She felt ashamed for Tony. "He's gone to Seattle," she said.

Father swore in English. "How long has he been gone?"

Ida held up four fingers.

"He'll be useless." Father got up and paced the floor. "Henry Roy? Back to Port Gamble tonight.... Maldonado? More tongue than arm.... What about Bonneville's oldest boys?"

"School," said Mother. Ida did not want to contradict, but she knew it was very unlikely the oldest Bonnevilles would be in school. She supposed Father would get in trouble if he were to employ them, though.

"I'll go alone," said Father.

The next morning Father paddled to Dogfish Bay to send a message to logging camp. Ida forced her feet back
[endPage=58]

[startPage=59]
into stockings and shoes and went down the hill to school.

She would have preferred to have gone with Father. But she was not about to complain when she could look forward to his being home every evening while he worked on the new house.

Not many children were at school that morning. Teacher frowned as he took the roll. Only four Bonnevilles, three Goldsmiths, Ida, Leroy, and Leroy's brother Donald responded.

"Where is everyone else?" Teacher demanded.

"Mathew and Rose are still in the South Sound picking hops," said Leroy.

"I know about the Miltons, Leroy," said Teacher with exasperation. "Where are the other Goldsmiths and Bonnevilles, the Roys...Greers...Hanovers...John Canton?"

"Sick," said Katie's little brother.

"Sick," agreed Simon Bonneville, though Ida had just heard him tell Leroy his brothers had gone duck hunting with their father.

"Our superintendent at Tulalip is also a doctor," said Teacher. "Maybe he needs to have a look at the sick students."
[endPage=59]

[startPage=60]
Each child present maintained a serious face, neither agreeing nor disagreeing that a doctor might be needed. Even the youngest Bonneville did not show any alarm that could give away her brothers.

Ida was tempted to cough as though she herself had been kept home by illness on Friday. Fortunately someone at that moment asked if they weren't going to say the "Pledge of 'legiance."

Everyone jumped up and chattered out the pledge before Teacher could properly begin it. "With liberty and justice for all...for all...for all," echoed around the room as each person finished at a different time.

Katie Goldsmith started singing "My Country, 'Tis of Thee."

Just as Ida and Simon joined in, a shuffling sound came from the back of the room, near the door. The other children twisted around to see. Teacher rapped for attention on the dictionary stand, but the children kept on staring.

There was little doubt in Ida's mind what the noise was. She had heard it before. Sure enough, Jethro, the reservation policeman, started up the side of the room with Tony, in handcuffs. The only way to the jail, a small
[endPage=60]

[startPage=61]
room on the other side of the blackboard wall, was through the classroom.

The way Tony walked was enough to tell what he had been up to, but Ida could also smell from two rows away that he had been drinking. His clothes were rumpled, and one side of his face was swollen, with a cut over the eyebrow.

His grin, however, was unchanged. He raised his hands to Ida in greeting. She was so disgusted with him she turned away.

No one was left singing. Teacher sighed and motioned for them all to sit down. If there was one thing he did not like, it was having a prisoner in the schoolhouse.

Sometimes a prisoner talked to himself or sang questionable songs. But mostly it meant someone had to bring the prisoner meals until the next session of Indian Court met. That would not be until Saturday. The someone bringing the meals would be Teacher or Teacher's wife.

For a moment Ida wondered if Tony purposely got himself arrested for drunkenness each time he came home so he could have a week of free food.
[endPage=61]

[startPage=62]
Teacher rapped on the dictionary stand again. "I have an announcement of interest to you from our superintendent," he said. Not until he walked down the aisle between the desks did he get everyone's attention. He clapped a hand on Leroy's shoulder to still him.

Once Teacher had passed by, Leroy popped up again and followed him down the aisle, imitating Tony's lurching walk. By the time Teacher wheeled around to see what the giggling in the room was about, Leroy had slipped back into his seat.

Teacher took a deep breath and returned swiftly to the dictionary stand where he began his announcement. "The superintendent wishes to inform us that the new dormitory at Tulalip Indian School will be finished at Christmastime, and school will reopen January twenty-second, on Treaty Day.

"As you know, last year there was not enough room to offer more than a few spaces to students from our reservation. Only the Tilmans went and Tom Flanders."

Teacher shook out the letter and read directly. "This year I am pleased to hold open fifteen places for students from Port Madison Reservation. I know many families will want to take advantage of the excellent
[endPage=62]

[startPage=63]
education we are able to offer here, in addition to practical training in the trades and homemaking.

"Opportunities for the boys to play in the band and to participate in baseball, and for the girls to play basketball, along with well-chaperoned social activities, are other advantages to be obtained."

Teacher looked doubtfully over the classroom. "Who would like to go to Tulalip?"

Leroy's hand shot up like a fireworks rocket. "My brother and I will go!" he said. "I'll play a coronet in that band and first base on the team."

Teacher's left eyebrow went up, but he said nothing to discourage Leroy. Ida thought that was wise. School would be much more pleasant if Leroy went away. She eyed him critically.

His shaggy hair always looked as though it were trimmed with a hunting knife, and the rips in his trousers were never mended. But his appearance did not stop Leroy from giving orders while never taking them.

He made fun of Ida's reading every time she was called on even though he was reading a whole level below her. He'd find out soon enough who was boss at Tulalip, she guessed.
[endPage=63]

[startPage=64]
"Surely someone besides Leroy is interested in going?" said Teacher.

Ida shook her head. She was perfectly content to be going to the new school up the hill as soon as it was finished. The four Bonnevilles in front of her sat as silent as stones, hoping not to attract attention.

Katie slowly raised her hand after whispering with her little brother, who did not raise his. Ida was shocked. Katie go away? Why would she do that? And with Leroy?

She felt a twinge of hurt. What would she do at school without Katie? There were no other girls her age—just boys and little children. She was a year younger than Katie—did Katie want to be with older girls now?

"Three," said Teacher. He wrote the names down, then put the letter on his desk with a paperweight on top of it.
[endPage=64]
