[startPage=48]
Chapter 5
Mr. Simpson Says

The next morning Henry Roy, home from the Port Gamble mill, stopped by to speak with Father. Ida overheard them talk about asking permission to build houses on the land behind the new school.

"There's enough room for several families there," Father said. "We could keep the children close to school and still have a village."

Ida was so excited she could have hopped on one foot. All of Suqua could move up the hill with the school! It was not quite as good as living on the beach, but it was much better than everyone moving out to their separate allotments. She had known Father would think of something.

When he started down the hill to speak with Teacher that afternoon, Ida followed at a respectful distance. She
[endPage=48]

[startPage=49]
knew better than to distract Father when he had serious business to tend to.

By the time Father passed the schoolhouse, Henry Roy and Deaf Ellington's old wife, Annie, had joined him. Ida could see Nellie Goldsmith hurrying up the beach to find out what was going on. When the group reached Teacher's house, only Father went inside.

Hoping to make the waiting time go faster, Ida went on to Tony's place. "Tony!" she called as she came around the back of his run-down shelter. In some places the matting was so brittle that it had broken off, making the walls look as though they had been gnawed on by Annie Ellington's sheep.

"Tony, we're back!" Ida always liked to give him warning, even though it meant he might hide behind the door and jump out at her when she pushed it aside.

Today, though, Tony was not waiting to surprise her. Inside, the one-room shack smelled like damp dog. A small opening cut in the wall threw light on a canvas cot with an army blanket and an old bearskin piled on top.

The only other furnishing was a rusting iron stove with a frying pan of dried-up beans on top of it. Tony had not been around for days. Ida checked the water
[endPage=49]

[startPage=50]
basket by the door. It was one of Grandma's. Tony had worked two weeks in Grandma's garden in exchange for it.

There was still a finger's depth of water inside. No matter how Tony kept his house, at least he did not let Grandma's basket dry out. If he did, it would never hold water again without leaking.

Ida let the door mat fall shut, then pushed it open again to see if Tony's city clothes were hanging from a nail in the corner post. They were not. Tony was still in Seattle.

She heard the door close at Teacher's house. Father had come out and was moving off, followed by a band of people. Ida hurried over.

"What is it?" someone called out. "What did Mr. Simpson say?"

"He says you can't build on the new school grounds," Nellie hollered. "Can't you hear?!"

"Who can't build on the school grounds?" asked Annie Ellington.

Behind Ida, Simon Bonneville, one of her classmates, quietly declared, "We're staying where we are, on the beach."
[endPage=50]

[startPage=51]
Ida was confused. She pushed closer to Father, who held up his hand for silence. It took a few moments for people to acknowledge him and quiet down.

"Even though winter is coming," he began, "Mr. Simpson expects to see the army builders any day now. If we are still on the beach when they get here, we will be moved off at once so they can begin work on the fort.

"We will not be allowed to build on the new school grounds. Mr. Simpson says it is time, for our own good, for each family to go to its land. Those of us who have not yet lived on our allotments may lose them. They can be assigned to someone else."

Everyone remained silent for a moment. The threat of losing an allotment was serious, indeed. So was the fact that they might be moved off the beach with winter approaching. Even those who had already lived on their land were upset.

"But there's no stream on my land," declared Ellington.

"There's no beach on mine," wailed Nellie. "Are we supposed to eat pine cones in place of clams?"

"It's too far in winter for the children to walk to school from my allotment!" said someone else.
[endPage=51]

[startPage=52]
The problems of living on the allotments had been voiced before, in the years since the land was first assigned. There seemed to be no solutions then, and Father had none now. He went on home.

Ida felt as though a very heavy stone were sinking down inside her. With slow steps she crossed the beach and angled up the slope to carry the news to David Jennings.

David's pleasure at seeing her immediately turned to concern when he saw her face.

"The army builders are still coming. We have to move to our allotments right away," Ida told him.

David's face sagged with distress. "We should never have agreed to move," he said. "This is my home, here on the beach, among my people. My people since I was a boy."

Ida nodded. They were her people, too. She could see them disappearing into the woods. All the people, all the houses.

"First they did not want us to live in Old Man House," David said sorrowfully. "It stretched from here to Nellie Goldsmith's with rooms connected like necklace beads. It was the People's home.
[endPage=52]

[startPage=53]
"They burned it down. They made us live in a village of separate houses. Now they do not want us to live in a village of separate houses, either. We must live out of sight of one another, as though we were warring tribes."

Ida nodded again. There was nothing to say. They had signed the agreement. She turned and trudged sadly home.

Little Grandma was digging potatoes in the garden when Ida pushed open the gate. She looked up for a moment, and in that moment Ida knew that Little Grandma, too, felt as though a heavy stone were sinking inside her.

"It is the end of Suqua," Father was saying. He sat with his back against one of Grandma's apple trees while Mother gathered windfalls from the ground around him.

"Suqua has always been ours. A gathering place of our people from ancient times to these."

"If we were to wait patiently," said Mother, "the fort may still never be built."

Father shook his head. "Mr. Simpson expects to hear word any time now. That's why he's getting the school built as quickly as possible."
[endPage=53]

[startPage=54]
Mother put another armful of apples in the basket. She looked deeply disappointed. "The children will not come to school, scattered all over the reservation," she said, sounding as though she were thinking of something else altogether.

Father nodded tiredly and reached for Mother's hand. Ida went quietly into the house. If going to the allotments was for their own good, like Teacher said, why was no one happy about it? Why did it feel like being put in the corner at school? In the corner you couldn't see anyone; your back was turned for shame. All of Suqua was being sent to corners.
[endPage=54]
