[startPage=41]
Chapter 4
Father's Visit

The next morning Ida and Little Grandma rose in the dark to take down the shelter and pack the canoe. They had to hurry in order to ride the receding tide home. Otherwise, it would be late afternoon before the tide would again be in their favor.

The air was cold and the water even colder as they pushed the canoe off the beach and into the Sound. Ida did not mind. She did not mind putting off breakfast until they got home, either.

They followed along the shore of the island that slept like an old dog on its stomach. The sky lightened before them, revealing the pale yellow grey of day across water and land.

Ida thrust her paddle deep into the water. Little Grandma and she could live by themselves with only
[endPage=41]

[startPage=42]
what they had in the canoe, she thought. They would not need a house or land for a garden. They could eat out of the water and dig roots and pick berries to dry for winter. If they had to.

The closer they drew to home, the more anxious she became to arrive. She wanted to assure herself that Suqua and all she cared about in it were still there.

Katie Goldsmith's house gradually came into view. Her mother, Nellie, stood on the doorstep tossing out a pan of dirty water. Nellie's hair was uncombed, and she did not wave.

Ida supposed she had just awakened and was not in good humor yet. Maybe she and the children had been up during the night digging clams for her to sell in the city. Or maybe she was still cross with everyone over the baseball. Ida decided she had better not call out for Katie.

Soon the other houses of Suqua rose on the beach, with the church standing watch on the hillside. Smoke rose from the chimney of her own house.

Mother would be frying bacon, and the house would smell of coffee. Father would be sitting at the table pushing a forkload of pancake through a puddle of syrup on his plate. Ida strained to see if she could make out his
[endPage=42]

[startPage=43]
canoe on the beach, but she and Grandma were still too far out.

No doubt Tony would still be sleeping. There was no smoke coming from his house. There was no sign of a fort being built, either. Ida relaxed inside. All was well. The War Department had not come in her absence and moved everyone.

As they paddled in towards shore, Father's canoe became clearly visible on the beach. Now she could see the gash in the side where Father had been tossed against a rock in a storm. "He's home, Grandma. He's home!" she called over her shoulder.

As soon as possible, she jumped out of the canoe and began to drag it up the beach. "You go on," Little Grandma said. "I will take the fish to David Jennings's smokehouse to finish drying."

Ida kissed Little Grandma on the cheek, then grabbed a bundle of cattails and an armload of mats and sprinted up the beach. She slowed down as she passed Teacher's house. He and his wife were at breakfast, she could see through the window.

She was struck with a desire for them to know that she had been to fishing camp—the girl who always
[endPage=43]

[startPage=44]
behaved properly at school was rumpled and barefooted and smelling of fish: she had made camp! She did not stop, though.

She could see Father standing on the doorstep as though he had been watching the water for her and Little Grandma. She burst through the gate and ran towards him, tossing aside her load as he put out his arms and swung her up in the air as though she were four years old.

"We have fifteen fish, Father. Fifteen! And a basketful of cattail roots and—"

Father brought her back down to earth and cupped her face lovingly in his hands. He was several years older than Mother and had squint lines around his eyes from working outdoors. Ida thought his smile belonged just to her, though she was willing to share it with the rest of the family. "And what did you do with Grandmother?" he asked.

"She's leaving the fish with David Jennings." Ida put her arms around Father's waist and hugged him. He was not so tall as some men. But he was very strong from twenty years of pulling cross-saw in the woods. He was clever, and lucky, too, not to have injuries from so many years of logging.
[endPage=44]

[startPage=45]
Together they went inside where Ida hugged Mother, too. She seemed to be a little shorter than Ida remembered her. "A bath would be a good idea," Mother said, rubbing clean a spot on Ida's cheek. She dished her up a plate of pancakes.

Father pushed aside some papers on the table and, pulling up a chair, dedicated himself to hearing Ida's detailed account of camp. Father was only home from logging camp once a month and then for only two days. Always he rested first, then spent a long time catching up on the family's news.

Now, as Ida chattered on about sailing and cleaning fish and cooking over the fire, he said to Mother, "Any more children in the family, and I would have to grow more ears!"

As Ida spoke, she noticed the papers on the table. Some had sketches of houses on them. "What are these?" she asked, picking one up.

The paper showed a log house with a window on either side of the front door and a cedar shingle roof. Another sketch was of a smaller house made with boards that ran up and down like those of their own house.

"Is one of these for us?" she asked.
[endPage=45]

[startPage=46]
"One of them," said Father.

Ida was silent for a moment, almost afraid to ask what was on her mind. Mother would already have told Father about the new school going up since he had been gone. She would already have told him what Mr. Simpson was saying about having to leave the beach soon.

Father had not been home when the elders agreed to turn the beach over to the War Department, and he did not approve of their decision. But even he had said that the government gets what the government wants. Making an agreement had been only a formality.

Still, Ida hoped he would find a way for them not to have to move. He must! "Do we have to go to the allotment?" she blurted out.

"Sooner or later, we will move to the allotment," said Father. "I will talk with Mr. Simpson tomorrow to see what he knows. And here's your Grandma, what's left of her." He got to his feet as Little Grandma came in with only the top of her head showing above an armload of quilt, basket, and cattails.

Mother, too, hurried forward to help, but Little Grandma bustled on past to dump it all in the back bedroom. She returned to dish herself up some of Mother's
[endPage=46]

[startPage=47]
hotcakes. At last she sat down, and Mother brought her a cup of coffee.

Father returned to his seat, smiling at her in admiration. He was very fond of Little Grandma.

Little Grandma nodded at him.

Ida held up the sketches in front of Grandma. "We're going to have a new house, Grandma," she said somberly.

"Later, Ida," said Father.

With her eyes, Mother directed Ida's attention to the water baskets by the door. Reluctantly Ida put her breakfast dishes in the dishpan on the stove and took up the baskets. Sometimes she delayed doing chores. But not when Father was home.

As she trudged down the path, she realized Father was expecting to move soon. Otherwise, why would he be drawing new houses before he even talked to Teacher? It was not a good sign.
[endPage=47]
