[startPage=83] Chapter 9 Lullaby for Suqua The next morning, before Father left for the allotment, he took apart the grinding wheel and its stand and carried them in two separate loads to the canoe. He said that now he had a greater need of a sharp ax on the allotment than at home. Seeing Father lower the wheel into the canoe, Ida felt unneeded, like the little two-lidded stove that would not be making the move. She understood now that the new stove was Father’s way of trying to make a little happiness for Mother, but it did not make her feel any better. Mother had not spoken of the store, and Ida did not expect that she would. Not Mother, who did not fuss over things that could not be helped. Ida felt a flicker of pride in her, but mostly she felt lonely. Everything seemed to be drifting away—Suqua, Katie, the store.[endPage=83][startPage=84] She watched forlornly as Father paddled off. A chilly breeze had roughened the waters of the Sound. Overhead, a flock of honking geese merged into formation. October had come. She turned away from the beach and trudged on to school. Tony had decided, as she knew he would, to work on the new school instead of staying in jail. Every day he stopped by the house on his way to work and again on his way home. Once he stayed for dinner. Ida still did not feel friendly towards him. She could not forget that he could have been helping Father if it were not for the drinking, and that Father could then have been home at night. Sensing her unhappiness, Tony did not tease her. On Friday, at midday recess when Teacher was up the hill inspecting the new school, Mathew and little Rose Milton arrived back from picking hops in the South Sound. Rose, who spoke only the little bit of English she had learned from occasional visits to school the year before, wanted Ida to see her new dress. “Did you get it in Seattle?” Ida asked encouragingly. Rose nodded and hid herself behind her brother.[endPage=84][startPage=85] Mathew tried to shake her free. “Stop it, Rose,” he said. He straightened his new coat. Then, with great importance, he pulled from one of its pockets a note folded into a star shape. “From your cousin,” he said, presenting it to Ida. “Magda!” Ida exclaimed. “You saw her in Puyallup!” Mathew nodded, trying not to look too pleased at Ida’s enthusiasm. Ida carefully opened the star. “Cousin Ida,” it said inside, “I wish you were in the hop fields with us. Come to school at St. George’s this year! – Magda.” Ida grinned for the first time all week. Her cousin’s letters were always the same. Come to St. George’s. Come to the hop fields. Ida wished she saw her perky cousin more than once every other year or so. She looked down at Mathew. “Did Magda say anything else?” Mathew shook his head and went off with Rose still attached. Ida had just read over the note again when Katie exclaimed behind her, “St. George’s! Are you going to St. George’s boarding school?” Ida dashed the note away. She had no intention of going to St. George’s, but she did not want Katie to know [endPage=85][startPage=86]that. Katie, after all, was deserting her to go to Tulalip. “Maybe,” she said. “Oh,” said Katie, her face falling. “I’ll be the only girl my age left at school.” “There’ll be lots of girls at Tulalip.” “Mother says I can’t go to Tulalip. Absolutely not. People die there.” “They do?” said Ida. “Remember Sadie Nichols—George Tilman’s cousin from Mukilteo? She’s the one that died. Pneumonia. People die at boarding school all the time.” “Nobody dies at St. George’s,” Ida said without certainty. “My cousin would have told me.” She refolded the note and put it into her dress pocket. “Do stay at school here,” pleaded Katie, linking her arm in Ida’s. “Then we can still be together.” Ida held back a moment. But she was so relieved at being able to count on Katie again, that she blurted out, “All right. I will!” The two of them went off to play a game of post office with the little girls. Without Katie’s ball there were no midday baseball games for the boys and older girls. To make up for it, Leroy organized all the boys into a marching company.[endPage=86][startPage=87] “Like at Tulalip,” he said. “You have to march everyplace you go there.” He placed Mathew in his new coat at the head of the company and marched them through the girls’ post office game, out the schoolyard, down the beach, and into the water. Two of the three Bonnevilles refused to go in, and a scuffle broke out. The girls raced down the beach to see what was going on. Soon half the children were either sandy or wet. Ida wished Teacher would get back from the new school site. In the middle of the free-for-all, Tony and David Jennings were spotted paddling towards the beach in David’s frayed canoe. The boys ran off to greet them. Ida wondered why Tony was not up working on the school. She suspected him of playing hooky. Maybe Teacher was late because he was looking for Tony. She and Katie wandered down the beach where the boys were helping unload a large seal David and Tony had speared. “Feast tonight, feast tonight!” Leroy hollered as he helped drag the carcass up the beach. All the children but the Miltons, who lived on the north reservation, and Ida and Katie, immediately scattered for home to announce [endPage=87][startPage=88]the feast before Teacher could get back. David Jennings and Tony beamed with pride. Tony began to carve up the seal. “We passed by the north reservation to invite everyone there,” he said to Ida. “Father, too?” she asked. “Of course!” said Tony. “And your family, too, Rose.” Ida was so pleased Father would be present that she could have given Tony a kiss, but he was looking very messy from his gutting work. Gathering to eat together on the beach was one of Ida’s favorite occasions. She felt as though she were surrounded by aunts and uncles and cousins. She, too, rushed home to tell the news. Teacher at last returned and after being informed of the feast, much belatedly rang the bell for the afternoon session. Ida noticed that he turned his back to the beach as though to avoid spoiling things by finding Tony at work there. Inside the classroom everyone squirmed with anticipation, including Ida. Finally Teacher gave up and dismissed school early. Ida took little Rose with her since Rose’s father had not come to row her and Mathew home. “He’s coming later for the feast,” Ida reassured her in Suquamish. “Tony said he is. Your father would not forget you.”[endPage=88][startPage=89] Rose helped Ida and Little Grandma dig the last of the potatoes from Grandma’s garden to take to the feast. Grandma also took some cattail roots from her root cellar in the hillside for the older people who especially liked old-time food. Ida and Rose helped haul the roots and potatoes to the beach in baskets. At the fire pit, Tony and David Jennings had so many children helping they could hardly maneuver the hot stones around the seaweed-wrapped meat. Women were burying bread in the ashes to bake. Grandma put stones of her own in the fire to heat for cooking. When the children spotted Ida’s mother returning from work, they raced to the water to tell her she was the honored guest at the feast. It was just for her. When she looked very much puzzled, they burst out laughing and ran off. Father arrived, and the Miltons, and Carl Bonneville. Each was greeted with the same story, till everyone felt, if not the honored guest, at least very much welcome at the festivities. In the middle of all the activity, Annie Ellington stepped on something round and hard in the sand. She [endPage=89][startPage=90]reached down and scooped up the lost baseball. Within moments she was surrounded by whooping, cheering children. Nellie Goldsmith at first looked baffled, then sheepish. In the end, she grinned from one side of her face to the other. Annie entrusted the ball to a jubilant Katie, and Leroy’s little brother ran off for the broken canoe paddle that served as a bat. A game was organized. The men declared themselves one team; the boys and older girls formed the other. David Jennings appointed himself umpire, and Nellie Goldsmith hurried over to supervise first base. Around the fire pit, Tony suddenly found himself alone with the cooking food. Mother and Little Grandma laughed. “Go join the game,” Mother urged him. “We’ll keep watch on supper.” Tony wiped his hands on his clothes and hurried off to cover second base. Ida and Katie ended up last in the batting line-up. But Ida was so pleased to have Father pitching and Tony waving at her from second that she did not care if she got a chance to hit or not.[endPage=90][startPage=91] Simon was first up. He whacked the ball to left field and raced off while Teacher leapt forward to keep the ball from rolling into the Sound. Snatching the ball up, Teacher launched it at Tony who, unbelievably, dropped it at second, while Simon raced on to third base. “Stay! Stay!” screamed the girls. “Run! Run!” hollered the boys. Tony sent the recovered ball screaming past the pitcher to Simon’s father at home plate. Simon stayed. Leroy stepped up to the plate next. Ida’s father delivered the pitch. Leroy swung and missed. “Strike one!” called David Jennings. “Booo!” yelled the children. On the second pitch Leroy swung so hard he spun himself around. The ball popped straight up in the air and came down with a splat in Grandma’s basket of cooking cattail roots. Amidst much laughter, Grandma fished the ball out with a pair of sticks, and the women called everyone to supper. The children scrambled for plates and tried to hurry the grownups along, since it would be disrespectful to rush ahead of them.[endPage=91][startPage=92] Dusk slipped across the sky as neighbors and friends clustered in shifting groups to comment on the fishing, the availability of work, the coming winter. The forced move from Suqua was mentioned here and there, but no one wanted to talk much about such a worrisome thing. No one wished to give it power over the occasion. The chill of evening drew everyone closer to the fire. The children stuffed down a final serving of bread and meat and nestled back into their families. David Jennings began to tell the story of the speaking cedar tree. “Rain comes down like a river from the sky. It sweeps away the dirt from the roots of the giant cedar.” David moved his hands like the river of rain. “Wind hits against the tree like a blanket being shaken by a wild woman. The tree begins to lose its hold. It begins to fall.” The children around the fire leaned forward as though they, too, were falling. “‘Help! Help!’ the tree calls out to your grandfathers who are coming down the river. ‘If you cover my roots so that I will not fall over now, in many years, when I can no longer stand, you can make me into a canoe, and I will carry you and your families to paradise.’”[endPage=92]
