Chapter 8
The New Stove
Ida was sorely disappointed by Tony’s sentence. Without his help, Father would continue to stay over at the allotment during the week. Certainly she expected Tony to never drink again after this.
She was also disappointed that Father had not made it back for Court. She feared he would not be back at all this week. As for Mother, she was supposed to have Saturday afternoons off. Recently, though, she had been kept late due to extra laundry at the boardinghouse.
Little Grandma said they would go ahead and make a kettle of Father’s favorite clam chowder for supper. Ida helped her cut up potatoes and bake biscuits inside a covered pan on top of the stove.
She was setting the table when Father appeared without warning, tired but pleased at the prospect of supper with his family. Ida threw her arms around him and felt immediately more cheerful. She and Little Grandma set out hot water for him to wash up with and fresh coffee to revitalize him. Mother arrived from work soon afterwards and received the same treatment.
Ida wished it could be like this every day all year round—everybody home for supper. Father smiled as he sat down at the table and looked around at his family. As they ate, he told them about enlarging the little clearing by the creek on the allotment. “Taking down the trees will allow more sunlight for the crops,” he said.
“Crops?” said Mother. Father always declared he was no farmer, never had been one, never would be.
“Of course,” said Father, looking at Grandma with a mischievous twinkle in his eye. “We’re counting on Guk-kub to make us genuine farmers with a big garden and an orchard.”
Mother and Little Grandma smiled. Ida sighed. If only Father knew how much she wished that he himself would stay home and be a farmer.
After supper Father got out a Sears-Roebuck catalog Mother had gotten from the lady she worked for. “We will have a new stove for the new house,” he said.
He and Mother looked at the catalog pictures and exclaimed over the features. “Two ovens, four burners, a tank for heating hot water,” Father read aloud.
Mother smiled. Little Grandma shook her head in wonder. “My sister and I cooked on the ground,” she said.
Ida felt vaguely unsettled by Father’s taking an interest in catalog pictures—something he usually left to her and Mother. She glanced across the table at the upside-down picture of a stove. It looked like a large animal lying on its back with its legs sticking up. A dead animal.
It was not something she and Mother would want to sell in their store. “I’m sure it costs too much money,” she said.
“It does cost a lot,” said Father matter-of-factly.
“I don’t like it,” said Ida.
Father chuckled. “You won’t have to wear it.”
Ida moved away to sit by herself on the bed. They didn’t need a new stove. She liked their old one with no oven just fine. It didn’t take much wood, and it heated the whole house—the front room and the back one, too, if the door was left open between them.
And she liked their old house, too. She liked the clothes pegs on the wall and the flowered curtains at the windows. She liked the shelves along the back wall filled with jars of Mother’s canned fruit and baskets of Grandma’s dried fruit.
She studied her parents. They seemed excited as children. They didn’t even seem to mind moving away from Suqua now—Suqua that wasn’t going to be there anymore.
“What about Indian Court?” she asked suddenly.
Mother and Father both looked up. “Yes?” said Father.
Ida could not believe they had not thought about Indian Court. What would happen to Court when they all moved away?
“We will come back for it,” said Little Grandma from her rocking chair by the stove. Father and Mother returned to their catalog order. Ida went over and sat in Little Grandma’s lap, something she had not done since she was six.
A troubling thought about the stove occurred to Ida in the night. It still worried her the next morning when she went out with Father to the three-sided woodshed to split a supply of firewood for Mother.
It was Ida’s job to help Father sharpen the ax. She was the one to turn the huge stone grinding wheel in its wooden stand so that Father could press the ax head against it to make a good cutting edge.
Sometimes she liked to go out and turn the grinding wheel when Father was away at lumber camp. It gave her a feeling that he was close by. She also imagined that it helped to bring him home.
Usually when Father was home, she did not worry about anything. But that was not so now. As they approached the grinding wheel, she blurted out, “How can Mother have a new stove, Father? We need to save the money for her store!”
Father stopped and looked at her thoughtfully. “There isn’t going to be a store, Ida,” he said quietly. “Not now that we are all leaving the beach.” He took up his ax and examined the blade.
Ida squeezed her eyes shut to keep from crying. It was exactly as she had feared. Without Suqua, there could be no store. She and Mother would not be looking at catalog pictures anymore. They were not going to work together behind the counter, Mother getting things out for customers and Ida operating the cash register.
“Where’s my wheel turner?” Father said. Ida dashed away the tears in the corners of her eyes and took hold of the handle that stuck out from the heavy wheel. The more she cranked it, the faster the wheel went around, finally taking on a life of its own.
When she had brought it back to the proper speed, Father pressed the ax blade against it. Little sparks flew out as the wheel scraped against the metal. After a minute, Father pulled the ax back
