Ida Bowen's dark braids jiggled behind her as she hurried along the path, swinging her water baskets. Already, splashes of cold water had seeped through her dress. She hummed to herself to keep from calling out what she and Little Grandma were about to do.
On the slope above her, dark green fir trees rose into a cloudless dawn sky. Below her, the unpainted houses of Suqua slept on the beach like canoes pulled from the waters of Puget Sound. A seagull dipped and screeched over the sand.
Ida hurried past the mission church tucked into the trees like a small, snowy peak. She whisked by the cemetery where Father's first family, taken by diphtheria, lay buried. Nudging open the gate next door, she passed through the orchard and Little Grandma's garden to the house. She set the water baskets inside, her chores done.
Mother glanced at her approvingly from the double bed against the wall where she sat braiding her smooth black hair. Ida watched her twist the braid into a bun and fasten it with hairpins. She thought Mother the prettiest woman on Port Madison Reservation and hoped to grow up to be like her. She wished Mother were a part of her and Grandma's plan. She hesitated a moment, then bounded across the floor to land with her knees on the bed.
"Whooo!" said Mother in surprise.
Ida wrapped her arms around Mother's waist and laid her head on Mother's shoulder. "Come with us!" she urged.
Mother gave her a pat on the cheek and got up to dress. Ida had known she would not come. Instead, she would paddle over to the island across from Suqua to do laundry at a boardinghouse, as she did every day but Sunday. Besides, Father would be arriving on Friday from the lumber camp. Mother would want to be home then.
Ida sprang off the bed as Little Grandma came out of the back room, her black eyes bright with the same excitement Ida felt. Little Grandma was no taller than Ida but twice as big around. Her grey and black hair hung in braids to her waist. She handed Ida some quilts and a basket filled with potatoes, apples, and sandwiches.
Ida left the house right away with her load. She and Little Grandma seldom wasted words. When they did speak, it was always in Suquamish, the language of the People. Little Grandma did not speak English like the rest of the family, who used Suquamish at home but English at school and at work.
Ida followed the tree line instead of heading directly down the slope through the village where Teacher might see her. Teacher was also "Mr. Simpson," the agent for the reservation. He was a Boston—a white man—and made sure all the rules that were sent down from the superintendent of the Indian agency at Tulalip were followed. Ida knew he would not approve of her missing school today.
She slipped past Deaf Ellington's house and around David Jennings's yard where his tied-up dogs raised a clamor. David waved to her from inside his doorway where he sat at early breakfast. David also wore his hair in braids, like the men of bygone days. Grandma remembered when he had been sold into the Tribe as a child fifty years before.
Ida waved back at him now. David already knew about their secret plan. He was letting Mother use his canoe while they were gone. Ida would have to give him a full account of the trip when she returned.
Just beyond David Jennings's house lay the beach where several canoes were pulled up on the sand. Beyond the canoes stood Teacher's house. It was larger than any of the others in Suqua, with four rooms and windows all around. Windows that Teacher or his wife might be looking out this very moment.
Ida crouched down and scurried across the sand grass. She set the basket in the smallest canoe and dumped the quilts in after it.
"Daybreak! Where are you going?" someone called.
Ida flattened herself in the grass. Tony! What was he doing up so early? Tony Canavaro was the only one besides Grandma who called Ida by her Suquamish name, which was something only a few of the old people still had.
Tony had been ten years old when Ida was born—her own age now—and had helped Mother strap her into her cradleboard. Several years later, when his widowed father moved off the reservation, he made himself a shack on the beach. His married sister, who also stayed behind, lived on the family place in the woods.
Ida crawled forward to see around the canoe and scanned the area near Tony's shack. Tony was nowhere to be seen. Smoke curled from the chimney of Teacher's house. To her relief, he had not come out.
"What a glorious day for a fishing trip!" Tony called. There he was—sitting on the floating dock in a dark coat and matching trousers and with a tall hat on his head. She motioned wildly for him to be quiet. He grinned and shrugged his shoulders as if he did not understand.
She was doubly annoyed at him now. Not only was he drawing attention to her, but being dressed in his city clothes meant only one thing: Tony was going drinking. He was waiting for the eight o'clock steamer to take him to Seattle where he could buy liquor.
As though he could read her mind, he called out, "What a glorious day to go to the city for shoes!"
She ducked back behind the canoe. She was not fooled. She wanted to run down the dock and push him into the Sound. Now she was going to have to spend all of her first fishing camp with Grandma worrying about him!
Tony always came back from the city with lumps and bruises and no money left for food. His usually teasing eyes would be cloudy as though he were no longer home behind them. His chin-length hair would be matted and his clothes rumpled as though he had slept in the street. Mother had told him the city was not a safe place for a drinking Indian. Once, someone had broken his nose. It had a permanent bump on it now, not that this could make Ida like him any less.
Still, she frowned at him. As she crawled carefully into the canoe, all was silent except for the waters of the Sound lapping at the beach. She halfway expected Tony to sneak up on her. Instead, she heard Little Grandma approaching.
Little Grandma unrolled a cattail mat over Ida to hide her, then shoved the canoe into the water. Its bottom scraped against the broken shells of centuries' worth of Suqua clam feasts.
Little Grandma climbed into the canoe and used the paddle to push it deeper into the water. She seated herself on a mat and began to paddle, side to side.
"Good morning, Guk-kub," Ida heard a man very close by say to Grandma. Teacher! Ida squeezed her eyes shut as though that could make her invisible under the mat.
"Good fishing, Grandmother!" That was Tony's voice speaking in Suquamish equally close by.
Peeking at Little Grandma, Ida saw her nod in greeting and paddle slowly on
