[startPage=65]
Chapter 7
Indian Court

By midweek Father had determined it would be better if he camped out on the allotment for a few days at a time. He would get more done by not having to paddle home each evening.

Mother was worried about his working alone. "If you were clipped by a tree you might lie there hurt for days without our knowing something had happened to you," she said.

Ida was not happy, either. What good did it do for Father to be home from logging camp if she wasn't going to see him? It was all Tony's fault for getting drunk. Now he couldn't be there to help Father.

As she rounded the schoolhouse on her way home the next day, Tony called to her from the window of the jail. "Hey, Daybreak, how're you doing?"

"Well enough," said Ida, without looking at him.
[endPage=65]

[startPage=66]
"Ah, Daybreak, you're not still mad at me, are you?"

Ida turned around and scowled at him. "Father needed you. He only has three weeks left to build our house, and we don't even get to see him!"

Tony lowered his head. "Yeh, he told me he'd be needing help last time he was home. I'm really sorry."

Ida could see that he was. He always was genuinely sorry to disappoint people. But she was not ready to forgive him.

"I'll be out of here day after tomorrow," he said hopefully. "Tell your father I'll be ready to work as soon as Court is over."

"I filled your water basket for you," said Ida, and turned away before he could thank her.

Two Saturdays a month the Suquamish gathered at the schoolhouse for Indian Court. Fathers who worked away from the reservation tried to arrange their homecomings to coincide with it. Elders like Grandma, Deaf Ellington, Annie, and David Jennings almost never missed a session, feeling it their duty to be present.

Parents came with cases to be heard. Children crowded into the empty spaces and looked in through
[endPage=66]

[startPage=67]
the windows. What went on at Court was often more lively than what they could make up in their play.

Ida and Little Grandma squeezed through the knot of people at the school door and found a place along the back wall. All the desk benches were filled. Leroy Halley and his family, dressed in their best clothes, sat in the last row.

Nellie Goldsmith and her five children, the girls in fresh dresses, spread out across the front row. Ida was still upset with Katie for volunteering to go to Tulalip. Nonetheless, she watched for Katie to turn around, to see if she was nervous.

It was Tony, instead, who turned and smiled from a seat off to one side. He looked as though he had been allowed to take a bath. Jethro, the Indian policeman, stood next to him.

From the back corner, Teacher, too, acknowledged Ida and Grandma. Teacher was a guest here. It was the Indian judges and the people of Suqua who were in charge.

Ida wished Mother and Father were there. When the whole family was able to come, she felt especially proud, as though they were doing all they could to help carry forward the important business of the People.
[endPage=67]

[startPage=68]
At the front of the room the two judges took their seats, and the talking died down. The first order of business dealt with a petition. Judge Emerson presented to the People a young man and his wife, with their baby, who were requesting permission to reside on the reservation.

The young man came forward to say he had long wished to reestablish his grandparents' ties with the Tribe. He had been to boarding school in Chemawa, Oregon, where he had learned the carpentry trade, and he now hoped to make a business of building furniture.

The classroom buzzed with commentary. One by one, the elders rose to speak. Annie Ellington mentioned the young man's grandmother, whom she had known. David Jennings spoke of the Tribe's desire to encourage young people to live on the reservation. Someone else mentioned the importance of training in the trades.

Each one extended a welcome, and the young people were encouraged to enroll in the Tribe. Judge Emerson asked Teacher to write the superintendent at Tulalip to see if an abandoned allotment could be reassigned to the newcomers.
[endPage=68]

[startPage=69]
The next order of business was Tony's arrest for drunkenness. He looked puzzled when his name was called, as though he had been so involved in the young people and their baby that he had forgotten his own reason for being in Court.

He stood to hear the charges. "Third incident of drunkenness in five months," said Judge Lawson. He asked for commentary from the People. There was murmuring, but no one spoke out.

Judge Lawson looked at Tony sternly. "Our young people are precious to us," he said. "We have high hopes for them. Can we stand aside and watch them destroy their futures with liquor?

"Many of us would trade our worn bodies for your sturdy young one, our tired spirits for your fresh gaiety. Do not rob us of the pleasure of watching you fulfill the promise of your youth.

"Think on this as you continue in jail a second week or labor on the new schoolhouse an equal amount of time."

Another week! thought Ida.

Tony's look of surprise at getting double his usual punishment turned to one of shame as he glanced at Ida
[endPage=69]

[startPage=70]
and Little Grandma and lowered his head. He knew he had let them down.

The courtroom was silent for a moment. Then Nellie Goldsmith coughed and shifted expectantly.

"The next charge, theft of a baseball, is brought against Leroy Halley by Nellie Goldsmith," said Judge Emerson. Every schoolchild straightened up. Nellie rose to give her account of what had happened.

"That baseball come to Katie from her brother Harvey who plays on the mill team at Port Gamble. It's a real baseball. Been used in a professional game. Katie was good enough to let the children at school play with it at recess.

"That boy Leroy—" She turned and pointed Leroy out in the room. "That Leroy was up to bat and hit a pop-up—it was a pop-up, wasn't it Katie?" She turned to her daughter, who looked embarrassed.

"Anyway," Nellie went on impatiently, "when the ball come down, no one could find it. Not even me and all my children. That Leroy—" Nellie turned and pointed accusingly at Leroy again— "he put it in his pocket. My middle girl says she saw something round like a baseball in his pocket when he left for home."
[endPage=70]

[startPage=71]
"You were not there when Leroy hit the ball, Nellie?" interrupted Judge Emerson.

"I was not."

The judge did not look surprised. "Who was there?" he asked into the courtroom.

Ten children raised their hands. Four Goldsmiths, two Halleys, three Bonnevilles, and Ida.

"Ida Bowen, step forward," said the judge.

Ida moved nervously away from the wall. Her face warmed as everyone looked at her. She hoped she would know what to do. She hoped she would not make Nellie Goldsmith angry.

"Were you part of the game the day the ball disappeared?" the judge asked gently.

"Yes, sir," she said.

"What position?"

"Second base."

"And what position was Katie playing?"

Nellie waved her arm in the air. "Katie was playing pitcher."

The judge ignored her.

"Pitcher," said Ida.

"Does Katie always take that position?"
[endPage=71]

[startPage=72]
Ida cleared her throat and hesitated.

The adults in the room smiled to themselves, including Judge Emerson.

"Yes," said Ida. When it came to using her baseball, Katie was very bossy. She assigned all the positions, and she took pitcher.

The questioning continued. "When the ball was lost, was that the first time Leroy had been up to bat?"

"No, sir."

"Did Katie complain about the way he was hitting any of the times he was up to bat that day?"

"Not till after the ball was lost."

"I see. What was Leroy doing while the rest of you were looking for the ball?"

"He was looking, too."

"Are you certain?"

"I bumped heads with him looking in Ellington's canoe."

Nellie shouted out, "You see, he hid it in one of the canoes so he could come back for it later!"

Joe Halley, who had been fidgeting with the rim of his hat the whole time, jumped to his feet. "My boy is no thief! What would he want with a stolen baseball
[endPage=72]

[startPage=73]
he couldn't even bring to school to play with?!"

"Maybe he was going to sell it to buy food!" said Nellie with a smug look.

Joe Halley looked as though he had been shot.

"Tssss!" The courtroom broke into shocked hissing. The judges' faces turned stern.

Last winter Joe Halley had been called into Court to answer charges that his children were going hungry. He had told the Court he had a lame leg and could not hunt. Living on his allotment a mile back into the reservation, he could not even dig clams. The Court had not excused him from providing for his family.

Several members of the Tribe and Teacher, too, had found odd jobs he could do for them in trade for provisions to see his family through the winter. Joe had performed each job.

The community recognized his efforts by disapproving now of Nellie's comment. This made Joe only slightly less angry. His eyebrows rode his forehead like hornets about to lift off. Leroy looked as though he wanted to escape before trouble started.

Ida stepped quickly back towards Grandma. At the same time, the men leaning against the walls straightened
[endPage=73]

[startPage=74]
as though they might be called into sudden action. Judge Emerson ordered Nellie to step out of the courtroom.

Nellie crossed her arms and stuck out her lower lip. "I'm not leaving till I've got satisfaction!" she declared.

Both judges turned to the policeman, who looked suddenly ill.

"I need five men to help Policeman Jethro see Nellie Goldsmith out," said Judge Lawson.

Katie turned pale. The younger Goldsmiths slipped closer to her for protection. Eight men came forward, among them Tony, David Jennings, and Deaf Ellington, prodded by his wife.

Nellie Goldsmith sized them up. "I'll keep quiet," she offered. The men looked to Judge Lawson.

He held up his hand in agreement but ordered them to stand ready.

Ida glanced at Grandma, who had edged her closer to the doorway. Grandma's eyes were alert.

Judge Lawson continued his questioning. "Did any of you children see Leroy Halley place the ball in his pocket, in his cap, in one of the canoes, or in any other hiding place?"

All ten children, including the Goldsmiths and
[endPage=74]

[startPage=75]
Leroy, shook their heads.

"Leroy Halley!"

Leroy jumped to his feet.

"You are in the Court of your people. False testimony is punishable. Did you touch the missing ball after popping it up?"

"No sir."

"How do you explain its disappearance from the area around home plate?"

"I can't, sir. I didn't see it come down."

Judge Lawson conferred with Judge Emerson.

Ida kept her eyes on Katie, who looked tired and anxious. She knew the baseball was the only thing Katie had been able to call her own. With the many children Nellie had to provide for, everything else was shared, and nothing was extra.

"Loss of baseball is judged accidental," said Judge Emerson. "Nellie Goldsmith will pay the family of Leroy Halley one basket of clams to restore goodwill. Donations will be accepted after Court for the purchase of a new baseball for Katie, to be turned over to the school if the old one is found. Court is over."

Nellie looked out of steam and undecided about
[endPage=75]

[startPage=76]
whether or not the outcome was favorable. The children, however, sprang out of the courtroom like escaping mice and ran cheering down the beach. As Ida slipped out with Little Grandma, she saw Tony make the first donation to the baseball fund.
[endPage=76]
